This page describes the format used to represent the taxonomies that are the inputs and outputs of the Open Tree of Life taxonomy build system.

The format derives from NCBI and is intentionally rudimentary because our needs are minimal. A better format to use in the long run might be [Darwin Core Archive](https://code.google.com/p/gbif-ecat/wiki/DwCArchive), which is what is used by GBIF, EOL, and the Global Names Architecture (GNA).

***

Each source taxonomy (NCBI, GBIF, Index Fungorum, ...) has its own script that converts its
native format into this format.

A taxonomy consists of a directory of files with fixed names.  Example: `mycobank/taxonomy.tsv`, `mycobank/synonyms.tsv`, `mycobank/about.md`.

## Character encoding

All files  use the UTF-8 character encoding.  Native taxonomy files often use some other encoding, so conversion might be necessary.  Some aggregated taxonomies on the web have gotten this wrong and are a mess of mixed encodings and spurious re-encodings.

## Taxonomy

### File `taxonomy.tsv`

Four required columns, each column followed by tab - vertical bar - tab (even for the last column, which is unlike NCBI).  The taxonomy build tool 'smasher' doesn't require the vertical bars; they are optional although they should be either all present or all absent.  But some other consumers of these files may still require the vertical bars.

A header row of column names is recommended, but not required (for `Smasher`). If provided, it looks like:

    uid	|	parent_uid	|	name	|	rank	|	

All following rows are one row per taxon

**Columns:**

1. _identifier_ - an identifier for the taxon, unique within this file.  Should be native accession number whenever possible.  Usually this is an integer, but it need not be.
2. _parent taxon identifier_ or the empty string if there is no parent (i.e., it's a root).
3. _name_ - arbitrary text for the taxon name; not necessarily unique within the file.
4. _rank_, e.g. species, family, class.  Should be all lower case.  If no rank is assigned, or the rank is unknown, put "no rank".

Example (from NCBI):

        5157	|	1028423	|	Ceratocystis	|	genus	|	
        5156	|	91171	|	Gondwanamyces proteae	|	species	|	

**Optional additional columns:**

* _sourceinfo_: a comma-separated list of specifiers, each one either a URL or a CURIE.  If a URL, it should be either a DOI in the form of a URL, or a link to some other source such as a database.  URLs begin 'http://' or 'https://' and DOI URLs begin 'http://dx.doi.org/10.'.  A CURIE is an abbreviated URI using a prefix drawn from a known set, e.g. ncbi:1234 is taxon 1234 in the NCBI taxonomy.  Other prefixes include gbif:, if: (Index Fungorum), mb: (Mycobank). New prefixes can be added but this is a manual process, please request explicitly.
* _uniqueName_: a human-readable string that is unique to this taxon, typically the taxon name if it is unique, or taxon name followed by "([rank] in [ancestor])" where rank is the taxon's rank and ancestor is an ancestor that is unique to this taxon (among the taxa that have the same name).
* _flags_: a comma-separated list of flags or markers.  Usually these are generated by taxonomy synthesis and are used to decide whether a taxon is 'hidden' or not.  For example, if there's an 'extinct' flag then it may be desirable to suppress the taxon in an application.  See [here](https://github.com/OpenTreeOfLife/taxomachine/blob/master/src/main/java/org/opentree/taxonomy/OTTFlag.java).

### File `synonyms.tsv`

Usually there are synonyms.  These go into a second file, `synonyms.tsv`.  This file must have a header row

        uid	|	name	|	type	|	rank	|	

The header is necessary because it designates the order of the columns, which can sometimes change. These are the four columns:

* _uid_ - the id for the taxon (from the taxonomy file) that this synonym resolves to
* _name_ - the synonymic taxon name
* _type_ - typically will be 'synonym' but could be any of the NCBI synonym types (authority, common name, etc.)
* _rank_ - currently ignored for taxonomy synthesis.

Example from NCBI:

        89373	|	Flexibacteraceae	|	synonym	|	|	

### File `forwards.tsv`

This file provides aliases, resulting from a situation where one taxon
id has been discovered to be equivalent to another.  This can be due
to changes in the the way the taxonomy is processed, discovery of new
synonyms, or due to merge events ("lumping").  For example:

    id      replacement
    3434315 3434301
    5255304 828663

The second line says that older id 3434315 (occurring in one or more
previous versions) should be replaced by newer 3434301 (defined in
this version).


### File `version.txt`

When OTT is generated, the version number is placed in this file,
e.g. `ott3.0draft6`.

***

_This page was originally part of the [open tree wiki](https://github.com/OpenTreeOfLife/opentree/wiki/Interim-taxonomy-file-format), and was transferred, since then maintained here on 2014-02-06._