## Version 2.4 release notes

Features Index Fungorum, the Hibbett 2007 Updated fungal taxonomy,
extinct flags from IRMNG, and many small algorithmic improvements.

Released 17 March 2014.

-----
2.4.draft19 (2014-02-27):

* Microbes from GBIF and IRMNG now suppressed
* Deal with bogus 'incertae sedis' taxa in SILVA
* Deal with trivial parent/child homonyms in SILVA
* Remove spurious authority strings from IRMNG order names
* License and contributors files
* hide(), extinct(), etc.

-----
For 2.4.draft15 (2014-01-28):

* Hibbett 2007 upper fungal taxonomy
* Spreadsheet of assignments for Chromista and Protozoa (in progress)
* "Deforestation" removes all but one tree
* Improved rank merging
* "major rank conflict" flagging is now restricted to IF and GBIF
* IRMNG and extinct determinations
* Fixed a bug in 'refinementp' that led to spurious taxon insertions
* Diacritic normalization (normal form is without diacritics)

* Scripting via jython
* A suite of operators is now available for use from jython scripts

-----
For 2.4.draft3 (2014-01-06):

* Fixed a bug in synonym processing (it copied from source taxonomy to
  union taxonomy incorrectly)
* Fixed some problems with SILVA synonyms file
* Support for diacritics, folding together sibling taxa whose names
  differ only in diacritic marks
* Beginnings of jython scripting support
* The NCBI and GBIF subsets needed to build the 'model village'
  (Asterales) taxonomy
* Updated NCBI of course

-----
For 2.4.draft2 (2013-12-22):

The synonyms.tsv file now has four columns; 'type' column is new.
Inspect the header row to figure out which get column(s) you need to
look at.  They may move in the future.  Currently name, uid (= OTT
id), type, and uniqueName.

New 'fold' patch command moves children of A to B and makes A a
synonym for B.  (could have been done with 'elide' I guess)

The model taxonomy ('aster') now includes synonyms.

'in-part', 'includes', 'type material', and 'authority' "synonyms"
from NCBI are now discarded.

-----
For 2.4.draft1 (2013-12-14):

Added Index Fungorum (generated by Peter M's script)

Stitched taxonomies together properly under Silva:
 * Added Chloroplastida as a synonym for Viridiplantae (that's what
   Silva calls it)
 * Added code-level taxa Fungi, Metazoa etc. as taxa in Silva to
   ensure correct placement
 * Added additional taxa to base of study 713 to force plants and bacteria
   to be disjoint

Sibling homonyms are smushed together, when encountered in Index
Fungorum or GBIF.

-----
Internal changes (not "user visible"):

* Spelling variants file from Rick is now checked in
* GBIF source taxonomy list checked in
* Edits formerly in ott_edits.tsv have been moved out to misc_edits.tsv
* Synonyms file now has four columns; 'type' column is new
* Simplified the Makefile a bit
* Added rules to make short-list.tsv, the list of most serious deprecations
* New rule for aster-tarball
* New '--select2' directive improving on '--select' (will switch over 
  to new name later)
* New '--sample' proportional sampling feature
* Pull some collection modifications out of loop to avoid concurrent 
  modification exceptions
* Improve name lookup logic in patch system to reduce number of 
  ambiguities
* New "fold" command
* Fix patch for Berendtia
* Improve postmortem reports, e.g. for unresolved/ambiguous show the
  alternatives that were being considered
* 'eschew-tattered' rule discourages matching to tattered nodes
* Improvements to metadata handling
